Numerous studies have been done around the world, exploring the relationship be­
tween chess and education. The results are astounding.
Some governments have made chess a mandatory part of children's education. Many
homeschoolers embrace chess as a teaching tool.
Why is chess so highly valued?
The fact is, chess makes kids smarter!
In this chapter, we will summarize some of the findings from our research on the ben­
efits of chess in education, and include a few of our own observations as well.
The Venezuelan experiment, "Learning to Think Project;' tested whether
chess could help increase a child's intelligence. The study ran four years,
testing over 4,000 second graders.
The IQ of both the boys and the girls from this study improved after
studying chess!
Chess gives children problem-solving skills
Throughout life, one of the most valuable skills a person can have is the ability to solve
problems. Parents want their children to be able to find and select the best solutions for
every given situation they will encounter out in the real world.
A weaker mind waits for others to solve problems for them. Such individuals lack the
courage and skill to implement their own ideas. They become dependent upon others

to solve their problems.
As a chess player, you face your opponent one-on-one. No one is allowed to whisper
answers into your ear, or feed you game-winning moves.
Your child will start recognizing patterns. Children who have this ability are less likely to
make the same mistake twice. They tend to learn more from their errors.
Chess helps children plan for unwanted surprises
We've all been caught off-guard in life at one time or another. When you're able to think
quickly and have a few backup plans ready to go, life's unexpected surprises are never
really a problem, just an inconvenience.
Every player has been surprised by a move their opponent made. It happens. The trick is
to be able to handle the situation without crumbling, keeping a cool head.
When children study chess, they also learn to look at the world around them as it chang­
es. They tailor their plans to the new situations that arise. As a result, they can take con­
trol of many more situations, often coming out the winner.
Chess gives children the ability to think ahead
Successful chess players think ahead, predicting and guiding the pieces' actions with
the moves they make. They learn to envision future events.
Chess allows children to try out strategies for victory, learning what works and what
doesn't.
Each chess move has consequences, plusses and minuses to consider. As your children
gain experience, the effects their moves will create on the board pop to view more
quickly for them. This ability guides your child to make the best decisions.
Every game of chess is a unique battle. You learn a lot from the experience, taking that
knowledge to the next game. Your child will learn to do that in other areas of life, creat­
ing strategies to ensure continued success in their pursuits.

Public School 68 in the Bronx noted standardized scores increased 11.2%
in reading and 18.6% in math during the 1994-95 school year.
Principal Cheryl Coles wrote: "As encouraging as our scores are, the
benefits of our Chess Education Program far exceeded anything that these
scores could ever hope to indicate. There were significant outgrowths in
varying degrees in all curriculum areas. Such as: increased enthusiasm for
learning, increase in general fund of knowledge, increase in pupil atten­
dance, increase in self-confidence, increase in parent involvement, etc:'
-"The Benefits of Chess in Education;' Page 27
Chess gives children self-confidence
No one likes a braggart, but it's vital for our children to have a healthy self-confidence in
life. They should always know they can accomplish whatever it is that they want to do.
In a world where children are often ignored and devalued, chess gives them a tremen­
dous edge. Over the board, each player has a truly equal opportunity to come out ahead.
There is no bias for age or physical size. You win because you outplay your opponent.
No one can ever take a win away from you.
When your child starts winning against adults, there is nothing that can take that self­
confidence away from them. They have outplayed a grown-up!
They know that they can win at life too.

Coffee Talk
The confidence gained by winning
One young student hardly spoke to anyone and didn't engage in other
extracurricular activities. A few months after he learned to play chess, he
started beating his father's friends on a regular basis. One man reported
that the boy took his queen within the first ten moves!
After that, this boy really came out of his shell. His father was delighted
when he started playing soccer on the weekends.
Chess teaches children to think outside the box
Some schools spend most of the time teaching children to think inside the box.
Rules of thumb are important. They give you guidelines. However, when you know what
you're doing in a given area, you find you sometimes wind up ahead if you bend a rule
or two. Sometimes you set a new standard, which others will follow.
Chess players learn to think outside the box!
If we're going to solve some of the enormous problems this world has, our children
must be able to think outside the box. They will need to come up with many innovative
solutions.
Chess teaches children how to win and lose graciously
It's important for our children not to "adapt" to failure or start accepting setbacks. That
approach reduces a child's drive and determination.
However, when you win a game or lose a game in chess, it is proper etiquette to shake
your opponent's hand and say, "Good game!'' It is rare that you see players do anything
else.

Children learn this quickly, as they become accustomed to winning and losing. If your
child has trouble with losing, chess helps them get over that. After they play many, many
games, they quickly see that they can't win them all.
We teach our students not to do a victory dance every time they win. They laugh a lot
when we give this talk, but in the end they get it and even promote this idea to each
other on the rare occasion that a student forgets.
How your child handles wins and losses in life as they grow up, makes an enormous dif­
ference. People always appreciate good sportsmanship.
Coffee Talk
Chess manners are important
A mother of a five-year-old boy called to say that her son had been home
sick from school. To pass the time, he had asked to play chess with her. She
agreed, and won.
She was astonished when her son reached out his hand and said, "Good
one, mom!" Prior to learning chess, he would get very upset when he lost
any game.
Chess gives children the ability to create their own possibilities
The chessboard is simply a grid with 64 squares. At the start of the game, it is filled with
32 pieces. When a child sits across from an opponent, the board and set becomes a play­
ing field, filled with promise and adventure.
Children's imagination is enhanced through chess. They learn to create positions, put
ideas into action, and see immediate results.
Through chess, your child will learn that it is possible to conquer many obstacles and
challenges. Just knowing that they are able to flex creative muscles will open new doors
for them as they tackle their life goals.

Chess gives children the ability to concentrate for extended periods
Some parents fear that their children can never master chess, because they can't sit still
for very long. Fortunately, chess draws them into a special world, one that helps them
focus their attention for long periods of time.
The ability to concentrate will help your child with their other studies. Once they be­
come captivated by chess, their interests will soar in other subjects as well. As they focus
their mind on various tasks, they will improve and "win" in those areas too.
Coffee Talk
Chess improves concentration
One child had a lot of trouble sitting still. He couldn't stay in his seat for
more than a minute or two. After a few months, he played in one of our
tournaments and was completely absorbed in his games for over an hour.
It wasn't an overnight transformation, but the improvement in his ability
to concentrate was astounding!
Chess builds a sense of teamwork within children
The pieces on the board work together. If you keep moving just one piece, forgetting
the others, you won't do well. Players learn to use the pieces together, creating a har­
mony of movement, controlling the game.
New players will often begin with their most powerful chess piece, thinking that piece
can do the job of winning the game on its own. Beginners quickly learn that a piece can­
not survive very long on its own in the battlefield.
Later in life, when your child joins the work force, they will either join teams or form
teams to get work done. These teams will need to be organized and supported. Your
child will need to learn their role within the organization, so that they can do the job
well and advance.

When children learn to use all their pieces together on a chessboard, they will be build­
ing teams to create attacks and defend positions. They will learn to accomplish their
goals with teamwork.
Chess inspires children to tackle difficult tasks
There will be times when your child sits down to play an opponent and the odds are
against them, at least in their mind. Perhaps the other player is much older, even a
grown-up. Maybe they will play an experienced tournament player, whose rating is
much higher than theirs.
When they start winning these games, the ones they deemed "impossible" to win, they
might start to realize that nothing is truly impossible.
If the children of our society consider that there is nothing they cannot do, we'll wind
up with a next generation of problem solvers who can handle some of the issues that
previous generations have left behind.
"The most wonderful thing about chess is the way it transforms people
from the inside out;' said New York educator John Kennedy.
"Once they're exposed to the instruction, kids get chess fever. And once
they get hooked, their desire to apply themselves soars:'
-"The Palm Report," Christine Palm, 1990