a rents routinely report that chess is a wonderful bonding experience
___
for parent and child. Your child will most likely remember these lessons for the rest of
their lives.
Don't expect this book to teach everything about the game. Instead, we wish to help
you get your young child started on their personal chess adventure. We'll help you give
them a good foundation upon which they can build more knowledge. Knowledge also
grows as they gain experience and study further.
There's usually a sweet fondness in a person's voice when they mention
the parent or grandparent who taught them to play chess.
My father and I had many hours of fun over a chessboard.
-Laura
We'll give you an easy, step-by-step approach
We thoroughly embrace using a step-by-step approach when teaching children any­
thing, and chess is no exception. If you sit down and tell your child how all the pieces
move in ten minutes, you're likely to overwhelm them and they "won't like chess:'
The remedy is to move things along at the right pace. Start with one piece and really
teach your child all about it before moving on to the next.
There will be exercises for children of all ages
We're writing for the parents of younger children and older children alike. We've includ­
ed special exercises for two-, three-, and four-year-olds as well.
The lessons for a two-year-old will be a bit different than for a ten-year-old. Some two-

year-olds will be able to finish all the exercises given, while others might need to wait a
year or two.
Older children usually progress faster than younger ones, but that isn't always the case.
You need to move at the speed of your child. You'll know when they're ready to move
on, if you're watching for the signs.
There aren't any hard-and-fast rules of what you can expect for any given age. We can
tell you what we've seen with many children and students, but that doesn't mean your
child will follow these guidelines:
Age 1:T ouching pieces and board. Picking up pieces and putting them into a
•
bag. Putting them onto the board anywhere.
Ages 2 and 3: Naming pieces and learning how some of the pieces move.
•
Age 4: Fully able to do all the exercises in this book. Able to play a game with
•
occasional errors in piece movement.
Ages 5-7: Able to play a game without making many errors in piece move
•
ment. Able to spot when a position is checkmate.
·Ages 8 and up: Rarely makes errors in piece movement. Can find checkmate
in a game.
There will be tons of mini-games
This book is chock full of mini-games. They are very popular with children and will han­
dle the plea, "But, I just want to play a game now!" Mini-games allow the child to play
chess immediately, without thrusting them into a complete game situation that is over­
whelming.
Children will readily play a mini-game, but they might resist doing an "exercise:'
It is important to play each mini-game until you see that your child has accomplished
the goal set out by the exercise. Don't skip them because you think they are too basic for
your child. There are subtle nuances to be gained from each one that will form valuable
building blocks of knowledge.
We'll help you troubleshoot problems
We have a pretty good idea of the problems that you might run into while teaching your
child to play chess for the first time. We have taught hundreds of students, ranging from
two years old on up, including a few dozen adults.

Chances are, if you run into trouble, we've seen it before and can help guide you through
the lesson. You'll find a troubleshooting section at the end of most chapters.
Your child will learn to play chess
Chess has an unnecessary reputation for being a difficult game, a game only for geni­
uses. This isn't true. Anyone can play and anyone can become better at the game.
The key is to learn each step in the proper sequence. A child will embrace chess, asking
for more lessons, as long as they enjoy the process and understand what you are teach­
ing them.
Remember, there is no time clock here. It isn't a race.
You can re-interest a child in chess
If you have a child who started to learn chess and lost interest, you might be able to re­
kindle that interest by running through these exercises. Our approach will fill in missing
gaps. Many beginners are missing the basic principles covered in this book.
I had a new student, an eight-year-old boy, who told me he was "very
good" at chess. I paired him against another student and immediately
noticed that he looked unhappy. I took him aside and quizzed him a bit,
discovering he didn't really know how the pieces moved.
Once I knew this, it was an easy matter to catch him up to the rest of the
class. Today he is enthusiastic about chess and doing very well.
-Laura