The first time you read these tips, they may appear to be a bit theoretical, especially if
you're new to teaching chess.
Once you start teaching, though, they will be more helpful to you. These tips come from
our experience and are designed to help your lessons run smoothly.
It's useful to sit back and look at your child while they play. You'll notice
quite a lot about them. Their thoughts are impressive. I find most adults
completely underestimate how intelligent and bright an "average" child
really is.
-Bill
Stick to regular lessons, several times a week
If you really want your child to learn this game, you must commit to regular lessons two
or three times a week. Sitting down once a week with your child will not work as well.
There is nothing wrong with nightly lessons. If your child wants to play each night, then
by all means play!
I see students excel quickly in chess when they study outside our weekly
classes.
If they only touch the set once a week, they usually don't do as well. They
tend to make more errors.
-Laura

Consider the needs of their young body
Make sure your child has eaten well before the lesson. As with any study, your child can­
not concentrate if their stomach is rumbling. No one can!
Another issue is sugar intake. If your child eats sugar right before the Jesson, they will
not be able to concentrate on the board for long. It is best to skip chess lessons the day
after Halloween.
Also, if your child is overly tired the Jesson will not go well. Teach children when they are
fresh, not right before they are ready for bed or a nap.
The best plan is to combine chess lessons with some sort of exercise, especially when
working with younger kids. Bring the set to the park or beach and teach them after they
have run around for a while.
When I was first teaching my son, we would have a nice long swim in the
ocean before we set up the board.
Doing a lesson first wouldn't have worked as well, because the tempta­
tion of the water would be vying for his attention.
-Laura
Keep the lessons short and fun
In order to keep chess lessons a positive experience, it is important to keep the lessons
short and fun.
Your first Jesson may only last five minutes. The important thing is to end before your
child's attention veers off the chess lessons and on to something else.
As a general rule of thumb, the younger the child, the shorter the lessons.
Try not to make the mistake of going past that point where they'd rather go out and play
and you're forcing them to Jearn.

Use real-life examples
Relating your lessons to the world around your children will help them understand what
you are teaching. It may also bridge the gap to helping them apply some of the tidbits
to their lives.
Coffee Talk
Chess in the real world
While looking out the window of the car one day, a boy exclaimed, "That
car over there is moving like a bishop, and that one is moving like a rook!"
Another young student told his mother, "My friend's house is a bishop's
move away from my school!"
Use very simple words
When you are teaching chess to your child, keep your language extra simple and to the
point.
Avoid complex words that they might not know.
There are some chess words they will need to learn. Stick with these words during your
lessons and encourage their use. These terms are important so that your child will be
able to communicate more easily with other children or adults who play chess.
Keep your voice animated and real
If you think back to your favorite teachers or public speakers, they were probably very
animated and sincere. Their conversations were realistic.
When you're working with children you can often be a bit over the top with your speech.
Keep it real and true, but you can be a little zany and silly here and there if that's your
style. Children often become more engaged in the subject when you are animated.

Children learn by watching
If you and your spouse are able to play chess with each other, your children can learn a
lot by watching.
It will not only show them good moves and correct form, but it will spur them on to
learn more. As they watch you, they will want to play more. You can also let them play
with you, offering suggestions for moves.
Praise them often for a job well done
It is very important to let children know when they get answers correct, every time they
do. Don't just assume that they know they got it right. They need to hear it. They love to
know that you're proud of their accomplishments!
There are many ways to share excitement with a child when they do
something right. For example, kids tend to light up and beam brightly
with a "high-five:'
Your unique style of loving acknowledgements becomes very personal
and endearing for your child. It can do wonders to help them advance.
Turn your child into a chess coach
Allow your child to teach you or someone else whenever possible. Maybe they can teach
a younger sibling or a grandparent. Teaching is a powerful way to learn.
Breaking down a subject, so that someone else can grasp it (something the best teach­
ers always do), involves a challenging process that actually brings about a greater un­
derstanding for the teacher. Learning to teach a subject is an excellent way for your
child to build their own understanding oft he subject up to a high level.
You can develop your child's ability to teach and to subtly learn by turning around the
actions of teaching.

For example, you can "test" their knowledge of the subject by having them instruct you,
as if you were new to chess. Say, "Okay, now teach me (or show me) how to do that!"
Note: Some children will parrot the words, giving them back to you perfectly when you
ask, but they have no clue what they just said. Watch out for this. You aren't looking for
memorization of the chess moves and positions, only understanding.
Teaching children together
It is sometimes possible to teach two children together. This can succeed if they are
at the same level of ability, and if they work well together. Even though they probably
won't learn at the same rate, they will be able to play and practice with each other.
If one child is picking up concepts faster than the other (it may not be the older one who
is doing so), you can handle this in one of two ways. One way would be to give them
separate lessons, giving them each the chance to go at their own speed and have qual­
ity one-on-one time with you.
Another way is to allow the one progressing faster to help you teach the other. This will
only work ift he faster one is patient and willing to work at the other's speed. You'll have
to observe them together to see if it is working. It's important that you're a part of the
lessons.
If you choose this second option, make sure to give the faster child private lessons, mov­
ing forward at their speed, so they aren't held back or penalized for excelling.
Plan to repeat concepts for your child
Be prepared to repeat certain concepts over and over with your child. Don't get frus­
trated at this. It's all part of the process.
There are ways to do so which keep it fun and new. For instance, you can change the
way you word things, finding new examples to give.
Each time you go over a rule or concept your child will digest more, picking up new
aspects of the lesson.
Don't underestimate the number of times you might need to go over any one rule or
idea.

Let them copy your movements
When you are working with a very young child, you may need to start by having them
copy your movements. They will learn a lot from this process.
For instance, if you are teaching your child about a certain piece, you can simply make
a move, put the piece back, and then ask them to make the exact same move. If they
make a different move, simply show them the move again until they make the same
exact move.
Start with the simplest move you can make with that piece. This is typically a short move,
rather than a long move that puts the piece on the other side of the board.
Continue to move the piece to different squares, always putting it back where it came
from. As long as they correctly copy you, make a new move, perhaps making it a little
more difficult than the last.
If a move becomes too difficult for them, go back to an easier one. For instance, if you've
moved a piece five squares away and they are having trouble copying you, go back to a
move they were able to do (perhaps two or three squares away).
The thing to remember is that by copying your movements, they are making correct
piece movements. It is a good step toward making the movements themselves.
Use the board and pieces, not the book
There is no need to show the diagrams in this book to your child. The main purpose of
the diagrams is to show you what to teach your child. To teach them, use a real chess­
board and pieces.
It's so much easier for children to learn with a three-dimensional board and set rather
than from two-dimensional diagrams.
You should read this book first
If possible, read this book all the way through first and then start teaching your child. At
a minimum, read through these tips and the entire chapter you're working on. It's best
for you to be familiar with the game, as well as this style of teaching.

Do a rapid review of the last lesson before starting a new one
Even if you give your child nightly lessons, they will probably need a review of the last
lesson before starting the next. This process can be very quick. If your child needs to
work on a specific skill then spend some time covering it.
Go back to early steps if they're making lots of mistakes
If your child is having trouble with a section and can't seem to get the information, it is
always a good idea to go to an earlier exercise and see if they could use more practice.
There is no race to get through the book. The important thing is that your child learns
each lesson and enjoys the game of chess.
Anticipate your child's speed
Once your child has a certain concept down for one piece, they might quickly under­
stand the similar concept when applied to another piece. For that reason, the lessons
may go much faster for these pieces.
Watch for signs that your child understands the concepts given.
The speed of advancement in understanding piece movement is nowhere near as im­
portant as the thoroughness of their understanding of piece movement.
Moving ahead at a nice speed (for them) makes things fun for both of you.
Aim to have them always give the right answer
Ask questions that your child can correctly answer based on the information that they
have. Whenever you pose a question to your child, you should expect them to get the
right answer. Likewise, make sure any problem you give is one that they can solve cor­
rectly.
You're not asking questions to try to trip them up. Ask questions that your child is highly
likely to be able to answer.
Avoid asking your child questions that you aren't sure they know. It's better to start
by showing them the correct answers, before asking them to demonstrate a concept

they've never seen before.
This approach leads to a healthy self-confidence.
Instead of correcting your child, show them what they need to know
If your child makes an error, it is best to simply show them what they're missing, rather
than tell them that they're wrong. Try to lead them to the right answer.
For instance, if your child makes an incorrect piece movement, show them three to five
correct moves with the piece. Then ask them to show you how the piece moves again.
When you ask the question this time they'll feel good that they got the answer right.
Stick with a standard chess set
There are many chess sets available in stores. Most are completely wrong for a child.
Since your child is new to chess, you want the boards and pieces to make it easy to see
what's going on.
Experienced chess players never use strange, non-standard sets. In fact, tournaments
will not allow them.
I remember learning chess as a young child with a standard set. Years
later when I played in tournaments, I noticed some of the other kids mak­
ing unusual mistakes in some of their games. They were using strange
pieces their parents had given them. I helped convince the other kids on
my team to always use standard pieces.
-Bill
The best pieces
The best pieces are the standard design called "Staunton;' named after a famous English
chess master from the 1800's, Howard Staunton. These are the pieces in all the photo­
graphs within this book.

A weighted plastic set with a felt bottom works well for children who are young and just
learning. The pieces are easy to grasp, feel good in the hand, and are very durable. In
addition, they are inexpensive and the pieces are very easy to replace (sometimes they
come with a guarantee).
As your child becomes more experienced, you can invest in a wooden set. These are a
favorite at chess tournaments.
Chess sets are measured by the size of the king, which should stand about 3.75 inches
tall for a 20-inch board. The rest of the pieces are proportional to the king.
The best boards
The best boards are simple in design, with colors that are pleasing (not jarring) to the
eye.
One of the best options is a vinyl, roll-up board, forest green and white (which is a soft
cream color), with 2.25-inch squares. They are inexpensive and very durable. You can
even take them to the park or beach.
Where to get the best chess sets
Visit us at www.ChesslsChildsPiay.com for information on where to get the best chess
sets.
What to avoid
If possible, do not purchase:
Boards or pieces which use unusual colors
•
Boards and pieces that are too big or too small
•
Pieces that have a character theme
•
Boards that are too ornate
•
Pieces that are hollow or lightweight
•
Pieces that are made from breakable material (like glass or stone)
•
For instance, you should avoid the old checkers sets, which come with a cardboard,
red and black board. These do not make for good chessboards, because they are very
hard on the eyes. Plus, it can be confusing to have the red squares represent the "light"
squares. They aren't very light.

There are many playful themed sets available as well. While they can be fun, these are
very confusing for a child just learning about the game. "Which one is the bishop again,
mom?" isn't a question you want them to have to ask!
I've seen some amazing sets over the years. My father had a hand-carved
wooden set, which depicted people as the pieces.
As a child I enjoyed looking at it, but I knew it was only meant for decora­
tion. It sat on display for us to admire.
-Laura
The teeny-tiny sets available in stores are only meant for travel and should not be used
for learning. When a set is really small, the pieces are hard to pick up and move around.
Your child will knock over pieces as they reach to make a move. You'll probably do the
same thing. It gets old fast.
As your child becomes more familiar with the game, they will find comfort in the famili­
arity of their pieces. It is a good idea to start out with ones that are the correct shape,
weight, and material.
For experienced chess players
If you already know how to play chess, these techniques can make it much easier for you
to teach your children.
You'll be able to make up exercises to complement the ones given here. It will be easy
for you to set up realistic positions for the various steps along the way.
The primary thing you need to keep in mind is to hold back your desire to teach too
much at once. It takes discipline and patience not to teach concepts that are too ad­
vanced for your child's level.
If you stick to the sequence given in this book, making sure they are really getting eve­
rything you're teaching along the way, you won't go wrong.