Step 1: Here's how the queen moves
Start by setting up the board with the queen in the center of the board:
Diagram 9.1
1a. Tell your child how it moves: Tell your child that the queen can move forwards, back­
wards, sideways, and diagonally.
1b. I point to the squares: Point to all the squares where the queen can go.
Since the queen moves like both a bishop and a rook, it's a good piece to learn now.
While you point out all the squares, tell your child that the queen is the most powerful
piece on the board.

1 c. I move the queen: Move the
queen around the board, making
sure to move it in all directions. For
instance, you might move the queen
up three squares, then diagonally
two, down one, sideways four, diag­
onally across the board, etc.
Of course, you should remember to
take your hand off the piece after
each move.
After you have moved the queen a
few times, quickly point out all the
squares it can go from its new posi­
tion.
Diagram 9.2
Step 2: Mini-game: I move, you move
Set up a single queen in the center of the board. Alternate moves with your child using
this one queen, back and forth, back and forth.
This mini-game might be easy for your child, since they have had thorough practice with
the bishop and rook. They'll be familiar with the queen's basic movements. Neverthe­
less, some children will only move the queen either up and down (like a rook), or they
will just move it diagonally (like a bishop), forgetting the queen's full range of mobility.
Make a move with the queen and invite them to move. At the start of this mini-game,
just look for correct moves.
Make sure to move at a pace they can handle. Match the speed they set.
If they only move the queen like a rook, remind them that the queen can also move
diagonally. Encourage them to make some diagonal moves.
Likewise, if they only move the queen on diagonals, remind them that they can move it
forwards and backwards as well as side to side.

When you see that they are varying their movements (also the shorter and longer dis­
tances across the board), start speeding up your moves. See how fast you both can
move the queen around the board.
Step 3: The queen can't just go
anywhere
Sometimes it can seem to children
that the queen can just go anywhere.
It is very powerful, but it has definite
limits.
Start by showing your child correct
moves and then make an incorrect
one and say, "The queen cannot go
here:'
Here is an example of an incorrect
move:
Diagram9.3
Tell your child that the queen must
still follow a line. In diagram 9.3 it
isn't.
Give other examples that show the
queen moving all the way across the
board, but which are incorrect, like
this:
Show them a lot of correct moves
and a few incorrect moves.
Diagram 9.4

Step 4: Mini-game: Can the queen go here?
In this mini-game, you will test your child's ability to correctly point out moves the queen
can and cannot make. Start slowly by making a few moves that are correct.
Move the queen forwards, then side to side and then backwards. Then throw in a diago­
nal move and see if they think this is a correct move. Then throw in an incorrect move,
one that you discussed in the previous step.
Keep asking your child about moves, increasing your speed slowly and matching their
ability to keep up while still answering your questions correctly.
Step 5: The queen is very valuable
Although it may be obvious to your child, it is worth mentioning that the queen is worth
more than the bishop or the rook. In fact, it is worth more than both pieces combined,
but just by a little.
The message you want to give your child is that a trade of a queen for a rook or bishop
would not be good.
Step 6: Mini-game: You get four pieces, I get a queen
Set up this position:
Tell your child that you will play the
queen and they will get two bishops
and two rooks. Explain that their four
pieces together are better than the
queen.
Diagram9.5

Let your child know that they should try to hold on to as many pieces as they can.lf they
get down to only one piece, it isn't much of a game, so you should start over.
White goes first. Move your queen forward until it is attacking one of the rooks, like so:
Diagram 9.6
If your child misses that their rook is attacked (which is very common when this game is
first played), ask, "Am I attacking anything?"
If they have trouble seeing that your queen is attacking their rook, ask them to point
out all the squares where the queen can go (you can help them with this). This is a good
exercise to do periodically, as it gets them looking at the full range of a piece.
Now they need to figure out how to save the rook. Make sure they move it to a square
where it is safe.
Then attack another piece and see if they spot it on their own. Again, help them find the
attack.
After a while, you can start taking their pieces, making a game out of it.

Show them that the queen can attack two pieces at once. For instance, say the queen
attacks the rook as above and the rook moves like so:
Diagram 9.7
Now you can move your queen here:
Give them a moment to look at the
position and then ask, "How many
pieces is my queen attacking?" Get
them to show you both rooks.
Diagram9.8

Now ask them to solve the problem, so that they don't lose either rook. One correct so­
lution is to protect one rook with the other, with one solution being:
Diagram 9.9
This is just one example, but you will see other ways to attack two pieces at the same
time with the queen.
Your child will learn that if they can guard their pieces the queen should not take them.
In the above example, if the queen took the rook, it would be taken back.T hat would be
a bad trade (and in this case the mini-game would end because White would have no
pieces left on the board to move).
Through this mini-game, they will also figure out how the queen attacks and will be
more aware of its power.
Keep playing until your child has figured out how to hold onto their pieces, by guarding
them.

Step 7: Mini-game: I move, you move with rooks, bishops, and queens
Set up this position:
Diagram 9.10
Normally the queens would sit on the board across from each other, but with this mini­
game we put the black queen in a different spot so that it couldn't get taken on the first
move. We also did this with the rooks.
The focus here is to practice all the skills that your child has learned, together in one
mini-game. At first the focus will be on moving all the pieces correctly. That's an impor­
tant step.
When you see they have the movements down, start attacking their pieces, encourag­
ing them to get out of danger. Also, put your pieces in danger now and then and see if
they notice that they can take.
When your child can move these three pieces with ease, attack your pieces, take pieces,
and protect their pieces, you can move on.
This is a mini-game that you can play over and over. It is a good idea to go back to it,

even when you've read further ahead in the book. It is an excellent review of a number
of key concepts.
??
Troubleshooting Tips
{.. ' .
,,,
. .
• • •
Problem:
My child has trouble moving the queen.
Solution:
If they have the bishop and rook movements down, but are having trouble mastering
the queen, work with them a bit more on the mini-game, "I move, you move:'
Work with your child to point out all the squares where the queen can go. You point out
some and have them point out some.
Another variation of this is to put pieces on the board on all the squares where the
queen can go. It would look something like this diagram, which shows all the squares
that the black queen in the center can go to:
Diagram 9. 11

Problem:
My child still thinks the queen can go anywhere on the board.
Solution:
It is important to actually tell your child that the queen cannot just go anywhere. It is a
common misconception that children have, as the queen can move to many different
squares. They start to think of the piece as an all-powerful superhero!
Make a point of spending some time on Steps 3 and 4. Show them many examples of
incorrect queen moves, as well as correct queen moves.
Problem:
In the mini-games, my child keeps putting his pieces in danger.
Solution:
If your child moves their pieces into the path of your piece, ask them, "Can I take that
piece?" If they continue to move into danger, have them point to all the squares each
piece can move to on the board.
If they still have trouble, go back to the mini-game, "Attacking and Protecting:' Spend
more time with this one.
Problem:
My child doesn't notice when I've attacked her piece.
Solution:
If your child misses an attack, give them another chance to get out of danger. Try to re­
create that kind of attack again later in the game and see if they spot it.
There is probably a pattern you can observe. Are they missing the long diagonal at­
tacks? If so, have them point to all the squares where the bishop can go (or the queen).
If they are missing rook movements, have them point out all the squares where the rook
can go.
If they have trouble with the bishops and rooks, go back to the mini-game with just
those two pieces. It's important not to rush past that too quickly.
When you play that mini-game, pick a piece and ask your child to point to all the squares
where one piece can go. Then play a few more moves and ask about another piece. If
they miss squares, help them point out all of them.

After they are confident about that mini-game, go back to this one, with the queens on
the board.
Problem:
My child doesn't notice when he can take my piece.
Solution:
When you move a piece of yours into attack, and your child doesn't notice, allow them
to take back the move. Ask them, "Can you take any of my pieces?"lf they can't spot the
piece, point to one piece at a time and ask,"Can that piece take mine?"
If they answer "no" with certainty (and are correct), move on to the next piece. If they
aren't sure, have them point to all the squares where the piece can go. This will give
them confidence that the piece cannot take yours.
Eventually, they will find the correct piece. Once they do, allow them to take your piece.
The victory will still be sweet.
Problem:
My child is bored with this mini-game, but doesn't seem to get it.
Solution:
Go back to the bishop-and-rook mini-game and set up more positions where your child
can take your pieces and you can threaten to take theirs. If they don't have that exercise
down, they won't like the one with the queen. The queen is harder to understand and
can be overwhelming if the rooks and bishops aren't understood.