Step 1: Here's how the king moves
1 a. Tell your child how it moves: The king can move one square in any direction.
Diagram 7 0.1
Also let them know that although the king cannot move very far, it is the most impor­
tant piece on the board. Explain to your child that their job is to protect the king and
attack the other player's king.
It might be tempting to get into an explanation of check or checkmate here (if you know
these terms), but don't, as those are much more advanced concepts. We will touch on
them in the upcoming chapters.
1 b. I point to the squares: Point to all the squares where the king can move.

1c. l move the king: Move the king one square at a time, making sure to let go of the
piece after each move. Move it forward, diagonally, sideways, and backward. This should
be a quick demonstration.
Step 2: Mini-game: I move, you move
Make a move with the king and then have your child make a move. Alternate moves as
you would with the other mini-games. Be sure that your child shows you that the king
can also move diagonally, as well as forward, backward and side to side.
Step 3: The king can move like this, it can't move like that
Since the king is limited in movement, it is important to reinforce the idea that it can
only move one square at a time.
Make several moves that are correct king moves and then jump the king two squares
and tell your child that the king cannot move like that.
Make additional correct moves and incorrect moves. This should be a quick drill.
Step 4: Mini-game: Can the king move like this?
Make a few correct moves and then
move the king two squares and ask,
"Can the king move like this?" Con­
tinue to ask about correct moves and
incorrect ones. Speed up the game
until they have it down cold.
Step 5: The king can take, too
Set up this position:
Diagram 10.2

Since the king has such limited movement, beginners can forget that it, too, can take
pieces.
Show your child that the king can take a piece too. Here the king can take the bishop.
Set up other examples for your child. You can use the rook, bishop or queen, but not the
other king. We'll go over why in more detail later.