he concept of checkmate is much more advanced than check. This
____.,J
chapter keeps it very simple.
The purpose of this chapter
It is important to know some fundamentals about checkmate, because that is how one
wins a game of chess.
At this stage, all you want to do is give your child a basic understanding of checkmate.
We will cover checkmate in more detail later in this book. There are a few other concepts
that we need to cover before we can delve into this topic more fully.
It is worth noting that beginners often have a poor understanding of checkmate. This
is because people often rush into this concept, before teaching some very important
basic concepts that make checkmate much easier for new players to understand.
It's a little like teaching multiplication when addition isn't really fully understood. A child
might be able to memorize a multiplication table, but they won't really get how to mul­
tiply. And they never will until they learn how to add.
In this book, we give you a solid foundation of building blocks which you can teach to
your child. This will enable them to see how to checkmate other players and win games.
Step 1:T his is checkmate
First, make sure that your child thoroughly understands check. If it has been a few days
since your last lesson, take a few moments to review the idea of"check:'
1 a. Tell your child what checkmate is: Explain to your child that "checkmate" is when the
king is in check and cannot get out of check.
Tell them that the way you win a game of chess is to checkmate the other player.

Remind your child that you never take the king off the board. Checkmate is the end of the
game.
Someone told me ...
One four-year-old student came up to me one day, asking, "Another
player said that you win at chess by taking the king off the board. I told
him that wasn't right. Was I right?"
You should have seen the enormous grin that boy had when I told him
that he was right!
-Laura
1 b. This is not checkmate: Set up this position:
Diagram 12. 1
Review with your child where the king can and cannot go. Here the king can move out
of check, so this is not checkmate.

1 c. This is checkmate: Add a rook as shown here:
Chess players often refer to checkmate as
II mate:'
Both mate and checkmate are acceptable
and will be understood by skilled players.
-Laura and Bill
This is checkmate.
It's checkmate because the extra rook
is now attacking those two squares.
Diagram 12.2
Step 2: Now you show me checkmate
Set up this position:
X's and O's
The white king can only go to the
squares with the black dots. It can­
not go to the square with the X.
Diagram 12.3

Have your child point to all the squares where the king can and cannot go.
Now ask your child to place a black rook on the board so it is checkmate. It needs to
cover the two squares that have circles on them.
Although this position is very similar to the previous one, it is different enough that it
will probably be a puzzle for your child.
Here are two possible solutions:
Diagram 12.4 Diagram 12.5
If your child has any difficulty with this, help them find a correct solution. Then put the
king in a different corner, place the queen on the board so the king is in check, and have
your child place the rook so it is checkmate.
Use all four corners if needed. It's valuable to make up examples in different corners
more than once.
Step 3: These positions aren't checkmate
Now show your child various positions which look similar but aren't actually checkmate.
Discuss with them why these positions are not checkmate.
Here are some examples:

Here the black king can move out of
check. Make sure your child sees this.
Diagram 12.6
Be sure your child sees that White can
take the rook. This solution is often
missed by beginners.
Diagram 12.7

The important thing to go over here
is that the black king is not in check.
The king must be in check in order for
it to be checkmate!
Diagram 7 2.8
Step 4: Mini-game: Is this checkmate?
Set up similar positions to those in Steps 2 and 3 and ask,"ls this checkmate?" Start with
positions that are checkmate and then set up positions that aren't.
Keep the king in the corner and only use the rooks and queen to checkmate it.
??
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
My child cannot figure out how to create checkmate.
Solution:
The first step is to review check. Start by asking your child what "check" means. Then ask
them to give you an example of check.

Next review with them the various mini-games in Chapter 1 1. If they don't understand
any part of this, checkmate will be impossible.
Also make sure that you have the king in the corner and that you've shown them many
examples.
Problem:
In the mini-game, "Is this Checkmate?" my child can't tell me which position is check­
mate and which isn't.
Solution:
If your child understands "check" and can do all the mini-games from the previous chap­
ter, but cannot spot checkmates, show them more examples. Show them examples of
positions that are checkmates and of ones that aren't.
See if you can spot a pattern of difficulty. For instance, if they have trouble spotting that
the king can take a piece to get out of checkmate, you might want to review the chapter
on the king. Show them more examples of how a king can take another piece.