tis important for your child to learn which moves are legal in chess
___
and which are not. If they start playing in tournaments, they will need to know this and
be confident in spotting move choices that are legal.
Kids enjoy using these two phrases, legal move and illegal move. They tend to grasp
the concept quickly.
Step 1: Let's go over what legal and illegal moves are
1 a. Tell your child what it means: Explain that in chess, there are certain moves which
are "legal" and some that are "illegai:'Tell them that "legal" means that they are allowed
to make the move. "Illegal" means that they cannot, because it is against the rules.
Be sure to explain that this is different from "illegal" where the police will come and ar­
rest people. You don't get in trouble with the law for making an illegal move. You just
aren't allowed to do it.
1 b. Show them examples: Show them examples of illegal moves with each piece. For
instance, moving the bishop forward three squares like a rook is an illegal move.
It is a good idea to show that taking your own piece is illegal.
Moving past a piece that is blocking a long-range piece, like a bishop, rook or queen, is
also not allowed.
And make sure to show them how moving the king into check is an illegal move. In­
clude a position where one king moves next to the other and remind them that this is
illegal. It helps to repeat this concept a few times.
If you make an illegal move, you must take the move back. If that happens, you must
then make a correct move.
Step 2: Mini-game: Is this legal?
Set up a position with a few pieces on the board. Quiz them on different moves, asking

them if the moves are legal or illegal. Start with simple legal moves (like a rook move
or a bishop move). Then throw in some illegal piece moves.
Then you can ask about which king moves are legal and illegal. When you start this
mini-game, give them plenty of time to answer. As you progress and see that they can
answer, encourage them to answer quickly. Make it an exercise of speed, where they
must answer as fast as they can.
When they can answer quickly and easily with a variety of positions, it is a good time to
continue to the next section.
Step 3: Show me legal and illegal moves
Put the queen in the middle of the board.
Have your child show you a legal queen move and an illegal queen move.
Do the same with each piece.
Also make sure they show you illegal king moves. Set up this position:
Diagram 15. 1
Ask them to show you legal and illegal moves with the king.

??
Troubleshooting Tips
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
My child cannot grasp the difference between legal and illegal.
Solution:
Be sure that they understand the terms, "legal" and "illegal" and aren't just nodding
their heads while you explain. Have them tell you what these terms mean, using their
words.
If they still have trouble, give them lots of examples. Each time go over with your child
what it is about the move that makes it legal or illegal. Start with something simple,
like moving the rook diagonally. Ask,"Can the rook move like this?" Since they did this
mini-game in the rook chapter, they'll probably remember that it cannot move that
way. Now point out that this would be an "illegal" move.
If they have trouble with king moves, review the chapter on check. Make sure they
know where a king can and cannot move.
Problem:
My child is bored and doesn't want to do the exercise anymore.
Solution:
If your child is getting all the answers right, they know it and you can move on.
If they aren't getting it, but they don't want to do it anymore, get them to tell you what
legal and illegal means. Make sure it is correct. If they are having trouble with a certain
kind of move, review that area. For instance, if they are having trouble knowing where
to move the king, review the chapter on check, which goes over this.
Also let them know that this is important for the game. They can't play if they don't
know the rules.
Their boredom most likely comes from the fact that you're moving either too fast or
too slow for them.