As you play your first games, take it easy.
All you are trying to accomplish with your first game is to make sure they are moving
the pieces correctly, while giving them the thrill of playing a game from the starting
position.
There is no need to play a complete game right away.
If you know how to play chess, you might be tempted to teach strategy.
Don't.
It is hard enough to remember how all the pieces move correctly. Let your child prac­
tice this for a while.
Expect your child to make mistakes. Simply remind them how that piece moves. If they
consistently move a piece incorrectly, do a review of how that piece moves. To review,
you might need to clear the pieces off the board to go over that piece's movements. To
resume your game, set up the board again.
It's a good idea to practice taking pieces in this game. Try to keep things even, if pos­
sible. Don't just allow them to take all your pieces, while you avoid taking any of theirs.
Trading pieces is an important part of chess.
What to watch out for
The only pieces you can move at the beginning of a game are the pawns and the
knights. Make sure your child doesn't hop over the pawns with any of the other pieces.
Also make sure that your child doesn't take his own pieces or try to put two pieces on
one square.
It is a lesson all on its own that your own pieces actually block your movement. Your

pieces can get in your own way! We'll go over this more in another chapter.
Don't forget to notice if a king is attacked. Help your child to remember that this is
check.
If you or your child checkmates the other player, the game is over. This probably will
not happen in this game, but watch out for it in case it does.
Enjoy your first game with your child! If you don't finish a complete game, that's fine.
Often it's better not to even attempt it.
The purpose of the first game is just to move the pieces properly. The first game re­
quires no strategy at all.
Troubleshooting Tips
Problem:
I don't know how many moves to make in the first game.
Solution:
Remember that the first game is just about learning to move the pieces. We'll get into
a bit of strategy in the next chapter. For now, you just want to see that they can take
pieces and comfortably move the pieces around the board.
It's always good to keep the lessons short when your child is young. Play the first game
for fifteen minutes or so and then offer to end the game. Congratulate them for play­
ing their first game of chess.
If they are super-excited and want to play more, let them. Just be sure to stop while it
is still fun.
Problem:
My child is making bad moves.

Solution:
Don't correct anything but incorrect piece movements. In the next chapter, we'll go
over some strategy on how to start a game. It is okay for now that they make any
move, as long as it's a legal move.
It's one thing to learn how to move each piece, independently, and another to learn
how to move them all on the board when they are together. When they can move
each piece correctly and you're satisfied that they have this down, move on to the next
chapter.
Problem:
My child is making a lot of errors in piece movement.
Solution:
It is natural that they will make mistakes, because now they are putting together all
the pieces' movements.
When they make an illegal move, help them.
If you notice a pattern of error, go back to the mini-games of the chapter which covers
this.
For instance, if they are having trouble hopping the knight, practice with just a knight
on the board. Set up the pawns around the knight (as in the mini-game in Knight Step
4: An additional exercise) and ask them to take each pawn with the knight.
As you play with your child, your child will learn each piece's movement better and
better and will make fewer and fewer errors.
Problem:
My child is only moving the pawns.
Solution:
Encourage them to use all their pieces. Chances are that they are moving their pawns
because they are shy about trying out the other pieces.
You can suggest moves for them, to get them started.
It's important in these early games that they show you how each piece moves.

Make sure that when it is your turn, you move pieces as well as pawns.
Problem:
We just played a long game and my child wants to play again.
Solution:
Your child will sometimes push to continue to play if you let them. It's best to end the
lesson and promise to play again tomorrow.
Usually, if you give in, they will play for a while and then get less interested. It's worse
to end at this point.