----ow that your child has had a chance to play their first game, it is time to
teach them a very important move-castling.
This move is more complicated than the others, so it is important to break it down and
practice it a bit first.
Step 1 : Here's how you castle
Explain to your child that castling is the only move in chess where you can move two of
your own pieces on the same turn. It is a special move with special rules.
Show your child how to castle, while explaining how it is done. Start with this setup:
Diagram 7 8. 7
Pick up the white king and move it two squares toward the rook. While you do this, tell
your child, "This is the only time in chess when you can move the king two squares!"
Next, let go of the king, pick up the rook, and move it to the other side of the king.

Tell your child, "This is castling!"
Note: You should only use one hand for this
move. First you move the king two squares
and then you put the rook on the other
side. Avoid using two hands.
Do this a few times. It looks strange at first,
but soon your child will get it.
Diagram 7 8.2
Step 2: Mini-game: Did I castle right?
It's a good idea to show your child incorrect ways to castle, so that they can see the mis­
takes one can make with this complex move.
Start by castling correctly and ask, "Did I castle right?" Now reset the king and rook, and
then have the two pieces switch places (a common mistake). Ask, "Did I castle right?"
Make other incorrect castling moves and then castle correctly. Make sure your child re­
ally understands when you are castling properly and when you aren't.
Step 3: You castle
Now have your child do it. Remind them to move the king two squares and put the rook
on the other side.
Encourage them to use one hand. When a child uses two hands to castle, they often get
confused and put the pieces on the wrong squares.
Have them do this step until they no longer hesitate.
Step 4: You castle for Black

Set up the black king and rook in their starting positions and have your child castle for
Black. Although it is the same move, the position is different and they may need to prac­
tice this a few times.
If you feel your child needs to see it first, show them that the king moves two squares
and then the rook goes on the other side.
Diagram 18.3 Diagram 18.4
Step 5: Castling often looks like this
Diagram 18.5 Diagram 18.6

Show your child how to castle in this position. You might say something like, "I'm going
to castle the same way I did before. First I move the king two squares and then I put the
rook on the other side:'
Step 6: You castle in this position
Now have your child castle using the position given in diagram 18.5.
Set up a similar position for Black and let them practice castling for the other side as
well.
Step 7: Here are all the rules of castling
When you see that they are consistently moving the pieces correctly, tell them that
there is a little more to learn about castling.
Rule 1: In order to castle, you must not have any pieces between the king and the rook.
Set up this position:
Diagram 18.7
Explain to your child that in this setup (diagram 18.7), White cannot castle because the
knight is in the way.
Rule 2: You cannot castle if you have moved the king earlier in the game. Explain that
even if the king moves back to this square, you may not castle, because the king moved.

Show an example of how the king could move twice, landing back on the square it
started. Explain that they wouldn't be able to castle in this case.
Rule 3: You cannot castle with a rook that has moved earlier in the game. Again, show
how this would be, by moving the rook back and forth, putting it back where it started.
Note: There are other rules of castling that are more complex. We've included them in
Step 14, but suggest that you not go over these until they've gained more experience
with the game.
Step 8: Let me show you what you need to do to castle
Start with the white pieces all in their starting positions. Make three moves which would
allow you to castle. Here is one possible end position:
Tell your child that you are all set to castle
now.
Now reset the pieces and make three differ­
ent moves to ready yourself to castle. Keep
doing this until you feel they have it down.
Diagram 7 8.8
Step 9: You show me what you need to do to castle
Now set up the same position for your child. Have them make three moves to prepare
to castle.
Once they have done this, tell them to castle.
Do this until they are confident in these moves.

Step 1 0: Let's play a game and castle!
Now set up the board in the starting position and play through a game. It isn't impor­
tant to finish. You are simply letting them practice castling in the setting of a real game.
After you have played a few moves, tell them that you'd like to show them more about
castling. Remember: do not get into any discussion about strategy. They are still practic­
ing moving the pieces.
Step 11: The king can castle queen­
side, too
11a . Explaining kingside and queen side:
Explain to your child that the chessboard
is divided into two sides. Show your child
that the kingsi de is the side where the king
starts. If one is playing White, it is the right
side of the board. If one is playing Black, it
is the left side.
Use the words "right" and "left" only if your
child is comfortable with these terms.
Diagram 18.9
And the queenside is the side
where the queen starts.
Diagram 18.10

11b. This is how you castle queenside: Tell your child that they can castle kingside or
queenside in chess.
Set up this position:
Diagram 18. 11
Now pick upt he king and move it two squares toward the rook. Let it go and pick upt he
rook and put it on the other side.
This is known as "castling queen side:'
Diagram 18.12

Tell your child that the king always moves two squares when castling. Then the rook
goes on the other side. It doesn't matter which side they are castling on, the same rule
applies.
Have your child practice this a few times. Set up the king and the two rooks in their cor­
ners and have them show you how to castle kingside and queenside.
Now do the same on Black's side, using the black pieces, having your child practice cas­
tling there too. Again, you should encourage your child to use one hand.
Note: Some people have a misconception that the king moves three squares, instead of
two, when castling queenside. This is incorrect.
Step 12: Here's why castling is a good idea
Discuss with your child about why castling is a good move. Ask them for their thoughts
on it. Do they think the king is safer in the middle of the board or tucked away in the
corner?
If they say the center, ask them to imagine they had a box of treasure that they had to
protect. Would they rather be in the center of a large room where people could try to
take the treasure from all sides? Or would it be better to be in a corner, where the walls
offer protection?
Now ask your child about the rook. Do they think it is better out in the center or in the
corner? Help them to see that the rook can
do more after it has castled.
Step 13: Mini-game: Can I castle now?
Quiz your child on the points of castling.
Start with the starting position and make
moves so that you wind up with a position
where White can castle (like this one):
Diagram 18. 13

Now ask,"Can I castle now?" If they have difficulty with this, quiz them on the three rules
of castling.
Now move the white king up one square. Then move the black bishop out and move the
white king back again. The position will look like this:
Then ask "Can I castle now?" If they have
trouble with this, review the three rules
of castling again. The correct answer is
that White cannot castle because the king
moved.
Now ask,"Can Black castle?" Make sure they
see the difference and that Black can castle.
Diagram 18.14
Now set up this position:
Let your child know that no one has moved
their rooks or kings. Ask your child to show
you all the ways that both sides can castle.
Next, tell them that White's queenside rook
has moved. You can show this by moving
it over one square and back. Tell your child
that White's kingside rook has not moved.
Ask, "Can White castle queenside?" and
then ask,"How about kingside?"
Diagram 7 8. 7 5

Now set up this position:
Diagram 18.16
Ask, "Can White castle?" Find out which side. Then ask if Black can castle (and ask which
side).
Keep quizzing your child, using positions similar to these, until they have this down.
Step 14: Optional: More on castling
This section should be skipped for now.
It is included here to give you a complete understanding of all the rules of castling.
Teach them these advanced rules when your child has gained experience and they're
ready to play in a more advanced setting.
Along with the basic rules of castling, there are three times when one may not castle:
You can't castle into check.
•
You can't castle to get out of check.
•
You can't castle through check.
•

14a: You can't castle into check: Here is what castling into check would look like:
Diagram 18. 17 Diagram 18.18
This one is straightforward and obvious. Since you can never move your king into check,
it makes sense that you cannot castle into check. It is still worth mentioning, as a begin­
ner may not put this together.
14b: You can't castle to get out of check: Here's what castling to get out of check would
look like:
Diagram 78. 79 Diagram 18.20

This one isn't as obvious. In fact, it might seem like a logical escape. However, the rules
of chess state that you can't get out of check by castling.
14c: You can't castle through check: Here is what castling through check would look
like:
Diagram 18.21 Diagram 18.22
Here you see that in order for White to castle, the king must travel through a square that
is covered by the black rook. This is not allowed.
??
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
My child is having trouble castling.
Solution:
Take all the pieces off the board and just focus on the king and rook. Help them castle
and then reset the position and castle again.

It is important that they always follow the same pattern. Move the king two squares and
then put the rook on the other side.
Problem:
My child castles with two hands.
Solution:
It is natural for a child to want to castle with two hands, because they are moving two
pieces in one turn. However, if they use two hands, they often put one or both of the
pieces in the wrong place.
The correct way to castle is to move the king two squares first and then move the rook.
If your child continues to use two hands, start by reminding them. Have them practice
castling with one hand. And make sure that you yourself always castle with one hand.
You can also have them sit on one hand while they castle. This helps!
Problem:
My child doesn't understand the advanced rules of castling.
Solution:
Skip these rules until your child really understands all aspects of the game.
If you started teaching these rules and realized that your child doesn't understand them,
simply end that part of the lesson and ask if they'd like to play another game.
Problem:
My child can't tell me when they can castle in "Step 12: Can I castle now?"
Solution:
Go over the rules of castling again. Show examples of each rule, so that they can see why
they can't castle in that position.
Show them many more examples, illustrating positions where one side can castle and
when they can't.
Have them show you examples where one side can't castle.
Then, show them a position where White cannot castle and tell them, "White can't cas-

tie. Can you tell me why?" Discuss it with them, helping them to understand.
When they have this down, repeat "Step 12: Can I castle now?" until they can spot when
they can castle and when they can't.
Problem:
My child can castle kingside, but not queenside.
Solution:
Tell your child that when you castle you always move the king two squares and then put
the rook on the other side. This rule is true for kingside and queenside.
Have your child tell you how to castle. If they are uncertain, tell them again (move the
king two squares and put the rook on the other side).
Show them how to castle queenside a few times. Then have them make the move.
Next, have your child castle kingside and then reset the king and rook. Now have them
castle queenside. Have them do this for White and Black.