n chess, you can get a huge advantage if you can get more pieces than
_____
the other player. It makes it easier to win.
Step 1: Mini-game: Who has more?
The first step is to help your child figure out who has more pieces.
If you start with positions which don't have a lot of pieces, it is much easier for a child to
recognize who is winning.
Here is an example:
Children instinctively know that it is bet­
ter to have more pieces than the other
player. Plus it's fun to take pieces!
-Laura
Teach chess with a minimal amount of
math. Comparing the pieces is better than
attempting detailed mathematical calcu­
lations. Here your child can see that Black
has one more rook than White. The other
pieces are the same. Use direct observa­
tion rather than extensive math.
-Bill
Diagram 20.1

Set up lots of positions like this. You can also set up positions with more pieces on the
board, like this:
It is usually best to teach your child to
count the pieces on the board, because it
gets them used to looking at the position.
However, when they are starting out, it is
much easier to notice which pieces have
been taken off the board in the early
stages of the game.
-Laura and Bill
Diagram 20.2
Here Black is missing a bishop.
In this mini-game, make sure one side always has an extra piece or pawn. Don't get into
relative values at this time (like when one side has traded a rook for a bishop).
Step 2: This is how much each piece is worth
In order to know whether you should trade one piece for another, you must know how
they compare.
For older children, you can use a point system, which many players use around the
world. For younger children, math should be avoided entirely. Don't try to teach about
addition. These lessons should just focus on chess.
2a. For older children who are comfortable with addition: Explain to your child that each
piece has a certain value. In chess we say that they are worth a certain number of points.
Start with a pawn. Tell them that a pawn is worth one point.

Now take out a bishop and a knight. Explain that these are each worth three points.
Ask your child to show you how many pawns it would take to be worth a bishop. Make
sure they actually bring out three pawns to illustrate the point.
Now take out a rook and tell them that it is worth five points.
Using different pawns, ask your child to show you how many pawns it takes to be worth
a rook. Have them compare the three pawns to the five.
Show your child that if White had a black rook and Black had a white bishop and two
pawns, this would be the same point value.
Next take out the queen and explain that it is worth nine points.
Show your child various combinations of pieces that would equal the value of a queen.
Finally, tell your child that the king is worth the game. lt doesn't matter how many other
points you have won. If you are checkmated, the game is over.
2b. For younger children: If your child isn't comfortable with math (addition and sub­
traction), don't talk to them about the point system. Instead, show them which pieces
are worth more than other pieces. Give lots of examples.
For instance, ask them which they'd rather have, a pawn or a bishop.
Group some pieces together. Show them that a group of three pawns has about the
same amount of power as one bishop.
Show them that trading a knight for a bishop, or a bishop for a knight, is usually pretty
even.
Discuss this with them. Although a pawn can turn into a queen, a pawn isn't very power­
ful at the start of the game.
Show them how much better a bishop is than a pawn. It can do a lot more, cover more
space, help other pieces, etc.
Also compare a knight to a pawn and discuss their values. Is a knight better than a pawn?

Note: Some people value the bishop a little higher than the knight, but this difference
isn't important at this stage. It's much more important to keep things simple.
Now remind your child that a rook is worth more than a bishop or a knight. You went
over that earlier in this book (in Step 8 of Chapter 8, "How to Attack and Defend Pieces"),
but it is good to mention again.
Take out two white pawns, a white knight, and a black rook. Tell them that the value of
the white pieces is about the same as the value of the black pieces in this case. Explain
to them that the rook is about two pawns better than the bishop or knight.
Now take out a white bishop, a white knight, and a black rook. Tell them that the two
white pieces combined are worth more than the black rook.
Your child already knows that a queen is worth more than a rook or a bishop. You can tell
them that the queen is even a little better than both the bishop and the rook, combined.
If you give them lots of examples, over and over, they will learn about the values of the
pieces without the use of math.
Step 3: Mini-game: Is this a good trade?
Quiz your child by showing them different combinations of pieces.
Start by asking about even trades. For example you could ask, "Is it okay to trade a white
bishop for a black bishop?"
Then ask, "How about a white rook for a black knight?"
Quiz them on all the combinations you mentioned in Step 2.
Step 4: There are some times when points don't matter
It is a good idea to explain that there are times when points don't matter.
The point system is a good rule of thumb, but there are many exceptions to these rules.

Set up this position:
Diagram 20.3
Here White is about to promote a pawn. Black has a knight. Discuss with your child
which side they'd rather play.
There are also other times when one piece will be worth more than it normally would be
because of how it is positioned on the board. Recognizing these exceptions comes with
experience. The exceptions aren't very important here, but should be mentioned briefly.
??
,
Troubleshooting Tips
. . , ,, ' i
• • •
Problem:
I taught my child the point system, but they are getting tripped up by the math.
Solution:
Do your best to take the point values out of the picture. Talk about relative values in­
stead. Stress that a bishop is better than a pawn and a rook is better than a bishop or
knight.

Once they are comfortable with addition, you can reintroduce the point system. It isn't
really so important now, though. As they play, they'll increase their understanding of
relative piece value in various positions.
Problem:
My child spends a lot of time counting the points of the pieces off the board.
Solution:
This is a hazard of teaching the point system to a young child. It is good to encourage
them to focus on the pieces on the board, rather than the pieces off the board.
Problem:
My child has trouble with certain trades.
Solution:
Focus on the basic ones. Is a queen worth more than a rook? How does a pawn compare
to a bishop?
It isn't terribly important at this point for them to know that two rooks are slightly better
than a queen. This subtle difference doesn't affect their games at this level.