Put a rook in the center of the board and point to all the squares where it can go.
Now set up this position:
Diagram21.1
Show your child that the white rook's movement is now blocked by the white pawn.
Point to all the squares where it can go. Now place another white piece on the board, so
that it further blocks the rook.
It is important that your child understands that their own pieces can get in the way of
the movement of their other pieces. The more blocked a piece is, the less valuable it is
to you because it can't do as much.

Keep adding pieces until you get a position similar to this:
Diagram 21.2
Now point to the squares where the rook can move.
Do this exercise with the queen and bishop, as well. Start with the piece in the center of
the board and then restrict the movement more and more, showing your child how that
piece becomes blocked.
Also, remind your child how easily a pawn
gets blocked.
Although the knight can hop over pieces, it
too can be blocked in. Set up this position:
In diagram 21.3, the knight cannot move!
Diagram 21.3

Step 2: Mini-game: Point to the squares where the piece can go
Set up positions, similar to the ones in the previous step, for the other pieces, where one
player's pieces get in the way of their own piece. Have your child point to the squares
where that piece can go.
Set up positions where the piece can go to many squares, and others where it can only
go to a few (or none at all).
Step 3: Mini-game: Point to the squares where the king can go
The king's movements can be blocked as well. This is an important concept to get across.
When your king's movements are restricted, it's much easier to get checkmated.
Set up various positions where the king's movements are blocked by its own pieces.
Have your child point to the squares where the king can go.
Here are some examples:
Diagram 21.4 Diagram 21.5

Diagram 21.6 Diagram 21.7
Set up many examples and have your child point to the squares where the king can go
(in diagram 21.7, the king is trapped by its own pieces).
All you want to do here is to get your child used to spotting the squares where the king
can go. When they can do this accurately and very quickly, move on.
Step 4: What piece can move?
Set up the starting position.
The only pieces that can move at the start
of the game are the knights and the pawns.
Help your child to see that the bishops,
rooks, queen, and king are blocked in.
Diagram 21.8

It is good to go over how blocking relates to the start of the game. With this new infor­
mation it will help to reinforce the importance of getting the pieces out quickly.
Ask your child if the white rook can move in diagram 21.8. Make sure they see that the
rook has nowhere to go.
Now ask your child to find another piece that cannot move. And another. Have them
find all the pieces that are blocked.
Next ask your child to show you the pieces that can move.
Work with your child to figure out how to get the light-squared bishop out. Have them
spot the two pawns they could move to get that bishop out.
Let's look at moving the pawn in front of the king:
Diagram 21.9
Ask your child to point to all the squares where the bishop can now move. Get them to
see how this piece can now become active.
Next, ask your child to find another piece that can now move. Get them to see that the
queen now has places to go.
Although the king is able to move, remind your child that they will probably want to
castle, so they shouldn't move the king.

??
, Troubleshooting Tips
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
In the mini-game, "Point to the squares where the king can go;' my child is missing some
of the moves the king can make.
Solution:
Go back to a position where the king can only move to one square. Come up with sev­
eral positions like that and then progress to a position where the king can move to two
squares.
As you progress, you can start putting the king on the edge of the board or in the center.
But understand that this mini-game gets harder when there are more places that the
king can go.
Problem:
In the mini-game, "Point to the squares where the king can go;' my child is picking moves
that are two squares away.
Solution:
If your child points to a square next to the king and then to a square two squares away,
it is likely that they are thinking two moves ahead. Remind your child that you are just
looking for choices for the king for right now, not next move (even though visualizing a
series of moves is wonderful).
If they are confused by how the king moves, thinking that it moves two squares at a
time, simply review the king's movements with them.