hen someone learns to play chess, they sometimes overlook when their
___
pieces are attacked. They can also miss opportunities to take the other player's pieces.
It is important to practice spotting both these points.
Step 1: Mini-game: Which of my pieces are you attacking?
Set up the board like this:
Diagram 22.1
Ask your child, "Which of my pieces is the black rook attacking?" If they have trouble
with this, do a rapid review of Chapter 6, "How to Take the Other Player's Pieces:'
You can also have them point to all the squares where the rook can move. This will un­
cover which piece the rook is attacking.
Give them a few more positions like this (with only three pieces) until they can confi­
dently give you the correct answer.
Now place three white pieces and a black rook and ask them which pieces the rook can
take. Vary the number of pieces the rook can take (one, two, or even all three).

Keep adding pieces, speeding up the game
as you go. Here's an example of a harder
position:
Diagram 22.2
Try different positions, using different attacking pieces. If your child has difficulty at any
point, use fewer pieces. Remember, the more pieces that are on the board, the harder
the exercise.
Step 2: Mini-game: Which piece is attacking which piece?
Start with positions where only one piece is attacking another. Here's an example:
With this mini-game, it is important to
keep the positions simple to start.
It can be tricky to set up positions where
only one piece is attacking another. Make
it easy on yourself and stick to using few
pieces.
-Laura
Diagram 22.3

Ask your child if any piece, on either side, can take another piece.
Give your child a moment to look at the position. If they have difficulty, you can help
them rule out a few pieces.
Start by pointing out that the kings can't take anything. Then show them that one of
Black's rooks can't move. You can also have them look at all the pawns and see that none
of them can take anything. Keep narrowing it down.
At first this may be tricky for your child. Set up more positions like this.
Long diagonals can be harder for children to spot, so wait a little before giving an exam­
ple where a bishop is attacking a pawn from a distance.
When you feel that they are ready, here is an example you could use:
Children usually have more trouble
spotting attacks on the long diagonals.
Increase the difficulty over time.
-Bill
Diagram 22.4
Ask your child to tell you which piece is attacking which piece.
The correct answer for diagram 22.4 is that the white bishop is attacking a black pawn.
If your child needs more practice, set up similar positions, making sure only one piece is
attacking another.

Now set up a position where two pieces are attacked.
Here the black queen is attacking the white
knight and the black bishop is attacking
the white pawn.
Diagram 22.5
As your child gets better and better, you can add in more attackers. Once they have it
down, you can show them a position like this:
It is good for your child to start noticing
their choices. There are many in chess and
selecting the right one might mean spot­
ting a checkmate or winning a free piece.
The first step in selecting the right choice
is seeing what your options are.
This mini-game is a good step in that
direction.
-Laura and Bill
Diagram 22.6
In diagram 22.6, the black knight is attacking the white queen and the white bishop is
attacking a black pawn. The white queen is also attacking two black pawns.

For the purpose of this mini-game, it doesn't matter if it is a good move to take a particu­
lar piece. For instance, in the position above, the white queen would not want to take
either black pawn. This would be a bad trade. Still, it is good for your child to notice that
these captures are possible.
The only thing you want your child to do in this exercise is to spot that a piece can be
taken. A player should always know their options.
With practice comes the ability to see when your piece is attacked and when you can
take another piece.
This can give you a huge advantage in chess, as it is easier to win when you have more
pieces than your opponent.
Step 3: Let's play!
Discuss with your child that there are two ways they might be able to take a piece. Either
they can attack a piece or the other player might just move their piece onto a square
that they protect.
Play a game with your child. When you get to a certain point in the game, ask your child,
"Okay, now what pieces are being attacked?" Have them point to all the pieces. There
probably will be many!
Keep playing and, after six or seven more moves, ask them to show you all the pieces
under attack.
Continue with this exercise throughout the game. When they can easily point to all the
pieces that are attacked, not missing any, you can move on to the next chapter.
??
iliroubleshooting Tips
,
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
My child has trouble finding all the pieces that are being attacked.

Solution:
Start with fewer pieces on the board. Find the point where they can easily spot what
pieces are attacking other pieces. Then add a few more pieces and quiz them on these
positions. Only add pieces when they are confident with the easier exercises.
Problem:
My child is selecting pieces that aren't attacked.
Solution:
Ask your child which piece is attacking the piece they selected. If they name a piece,
make sure they understand how that piece moves. If they have trouble with that piece's
movements, these mini-games will be extremely difficult.
If they shrug their shoulders, it is possible that they are just guessing. You'll need to
uncover what the problem is. If you're on Step 3, go back to Step 2 and set up more ex­
amples. If they're having trouble with Step 2, go back to Step 1. Spend more time here,
starting with positions with just a few pieces.
If they are having trouble with Step 1, have them point to all the squares where the at­
tacking piece can move. If they are missing squares where this piece can go, review the
chapter on that piece.