hen one of your pieces is attacked, there are four things you can do to
.. ..,_.,., .....- ..
protect it:
l.Moveaway
2. Block
3.Support
4. Take
It is important that your child is familiar with each of these four basic methods of deal­
ing with an attack.
1. Move away- move the piece so that it is no longer being attacked.
2. Block- move another piece between the piece being attacked and the
attacking piece.
3. Support- move a piece so that it could "take the taker:'
4. Take-capture the attacking piece.
They should understand all four choices, so that they can use them in a game to protect
their pieces.
Step 1: Let's review a little
In Chapter 8,"How to Attack and Defend Pieces;' your child learned that they can move
away or support a piece to get out of danger.
Review those concepts with your child. Show a few examples of each. Have your child
show you a few examples.
Now tell them that there are two other ways they can protect a piece.
Step 2: A piece can block
Another way to protect is to use your pieces to block an attack.
Set up this position:

It is a good idea to review the point that
trading the black queen for the white
bishop isn't a good option.
-Laura
Diagram 23.1
In diagram 23.1, the white bishop is attacking the black queen. The black queen can
move away, but Black can also block.
Show your child that the black bishop can block here:
Most children have seen a sword fight in a
movie. I sometimes explain that blocking
is a bit like a clash of two swords.
-Laura
You can also put an object on the table
and invite your child to look at it. Then
you can put something in the way, so that
they can't see it.
This is another example of blocking.
-Bill
Diagram 23.2

Explain that "block" means to get in the way in order to stop the attack.
Show your child that in diagram 23.2 White can take the black bishop, but then Black
can take back. It will be an even trade of a bishop for a bishop.
Here is another example you can show your child.
Here the black bishop is attacking the white
pawn. Help your child to see that White can
block to protect the pawn.
Diagram 23.3
Explain to your child that if the black bish­
op were to take the pawn, the other pawn
would take back. Black would be trading a
bishop for a pawn, which isn't a good trade.
That's why this move protects the white
pawn.
Diagram 23.4
Set up other positions where Black or White can block to protect a piece from attack.

Step 3: Mini-game: You block
Now give your child a chance to show you that they can block. Set up positions and
have your child find the move that will block.
Here are more examples, with White to move in diagram 23.5, Black to move in diagram
23.6, and White to move in diagram 23.7:
The first step in this mini-game is to spot
the white piece that is attacked. This will
be a good review of the last chapter.
-Laura
It is good to point out that the rooks sup­
port each other, which makes it possible
for one to block the attack on the knight.
Otherwise, the queen would just take the
rook.
-Bill
Diagram 23.5
When you set up this position, go over
Black's options to save the queen. Can it
move?
Also explore the idea of taking the rook.
White would take back. Black would get
a rook in exchange for a queen. Is that a
good plan?
These are all little reviews of previous
concepts.
-Laura and Bill
Diagram 23.6

Here the black rook is attacking a white
pawn.
The white bishop can block the attack by
moving in front of the pawn. It would be
protected by the other two pawns.
Diagram 23.7
Step 4: Sometimes you can take the attacker!
Tell your child that there are times when you can just take the piece that is attacking
you. Sometimes you can take it for free!
Set up this example:
It is very common for beginners to move
their piece away when it is attacked. It is a
natural response.
This step will help your child see that they
need to explore all their options. In this
case, White can just take the rook without
being taken back.
-Laura and Bill
Diagram 23.8

Explain that in this situation the black rook is attacking the white knight. It is White's
turn. What should White do? Discuss options with your child.
One possible solution is to block with the bishop. Since you just went over blocking, that
might be fresh in their mind. Talk about this with your child. What would Black do? It is
good if they can spot that Black would just take the bishop. These sorts of calculations
are what chess is all about.
You can start by asking your child to name all the pieces that are being attacked. It's a
good review of the last chapter.
The option of simply taking the attacker is often overlooked by beginners. They see that
their piece is attacked and they move it. It is good to be able to see when the attacker
can be taken.
Show them other examples where they can take the attacker. Here's another:
Diagram 23.9
Have your child play Black. Ask what piece of theirs is under attack. Now ask what they
can do about it. The best answer is to take the white rook with the black knight. How­
ever, moving the bishop will get them out of danger.
Also make sure to include positions where a pawn can take the attacker.

Diagram 23. 10
Show them more examples of this.
Step 5: Mini-game: You take
Set up positions for your child, telling them which side to play. Ask them how they can
take the attacker in each position.
Here are some examples:
Here your child is playing Black. Ask what
piece of theirs is under attack. Now ask
them if they can find a way to take the at­
tacker.
Diagram 23.11

It is good to set up a few positions where a pawn can take the attacker. This is often
missed by beginners.
Diagram 23. 12
In diagram 23.12, you'd have your child play White. Ask them how they can take the at­
tacker. You can also ask them which pieces are under attack, making sure they see that
both the rook and the bishop are being attacked.
Diagram 23. 13
In diagram 23.13, they will be playing White. Ask them what they should do about the
attack on the knight.

Diagram 23.14
In diagram 23.14, you'll ask your child to play White. What piece can they take to get out
of danger?
Set up more positions like this and ask your child to find the piece that can take the at­
tacker. In the beginning you can give them hints by asking questions like, "Which piece
is being attacked?" or, "Can you take the piece that is attacking you?"
When they start easily seeing that the best solution is to just take the attacker, go to the
next section.
Step 6: Mini-game: Show the four ways
It is a good idea to quiz them on the four methods to protect a piece:
Moveaway
•
Block
•
Support
•
· Take
Ask your child to show these four methods to you.
If they have trouble, show them examples of each of the ways they can handle an attack.
Then ask them to show you examples.

Step 7: Mini-game: What would you do?
Now we're going to look at some more positions, ones that might come up in a game.
In each position, a piece is attacked and one of the four methods of protecting is best.
Here is what you'll do for each position:
1) Tell them which side they are playing (White or Black) and set the board up so they
are facing the correct position.
2) Have them tell you which of their pieces is under attack.
3) Ask them to show you which methods are available in this position.
4) Work with them to find the best solution in the given position.
We'll give the correct answer next to the diagram for you to reference.
Sample positions
Here your child is playing Black.
They'll need to spot that their pawn is be­
ing attacked by the white rook.
The only way to protect this pawn is to
block.
Diagram 23. 15

Here your child is playing White.
Their pawn is being attacked by the black
bishop.
In this position, White can block, move
away, or take the attacker.
Discuss these options with your child and
help them work out the best solution.
Diagram 23.16
Here they are playing Black.
Once they spot that their pawn is at­
tacked by the white bishop, they will
need to recognize there is only one way
to save it.
They must move the king to support the
pawn.
This is a good example, as it combines
the concept of the long diagonal with the
idea that the king can support a piece.
Diagram 23. 17

Here they are playing Black. They only
have a king and one piece and look to be
terribly behind.
Fortunately their pawn is about to pro­
mote. When they move the pawn, they
get out of danger and they get a queen!
Diagram 23.18
Here your child is playing White.
The only answer to the attack on their
pawn is to block with another pawn.
It is good to give a few of these examples,
as this theme comes up frequently in
chess games.
Diagram 23.19

Tell your child that they are playing Black.
The correct answer is that the black king
can take the white rook.
It is good to give your child other exam­
ples, like this, where the king is active in
the position. Beginners often forget that
they can take pieces with their king.
Diagram 23.20
Create more examples like this to quiz your child. Some positions can have more than
one solution, while others can simply have one choice.
This is a mini-game to play over and over with your child. These positions will help tre­
mendously.
Step 8: Let's play!
Now it is a good idea to play a few games with these concepts in mind. Have fun with it.
When a piece is attacked, talk about the solutions available to protect that piece.
iT'r:oubleshooting Tips
Problem:
My child doesn't get the concept of blocking.

Solution:
You can tell them that "blocking" is just putting something in the way. Show them lots
of real-life examples. For instance, you can set something on the table in front of them
and then block it with your hand. Get them to see that your hand is in the way, so they
can't see part of the object.
Show them many examples in chess. Ask your child what they would call this. Consult
them on this point. If they want to call it, "putting something in the way;' that's fine. The
only important thing here is that they really understand that this is a way they can pro­
tect their pieces.
Problem:
On the mini-game, "Show the four ways;' my child cannot show me the four ways to
protect a piece.
Solution:
Show your child many examples of each of the four ways to protect a piece.
If your child still can't show the four ways they could protect a piece on their own, they
probably don't understand something about one or more of the methods. In order to
pinpoint the problem, set up a position that has all four methods available to them. Be­
low is an example:
Diagram 23.21
Tell them that they are playing White in this position.

Ask your child, "Which piece is attacked?" If they have any trouble with this, do a review
of the previous chapter. It is important that they can spot the attack.
Next, ask them to show you how they can protect their rook. See how many methods
they can demonstrate to you on the board. If they come up with all four, that's great.
That's really all you want.
If your child can't show you one (or more) of the ways, ask them about that method. For
instance, you might say, "How would you block in this position?" If they have trouble
with this, show them many more examples of blocking.
When you've completed this step, make sure they can now show you all four ways to get
out of an attack.
Problem:
My child is having trouble finding the best solution in the mini-game, "What would you
do?"
Solution:
As long as they understand the four methods, the solution is to give them many exam­
ples and talk to them about it. Find out what they think about each solution.
It takes a while to develop the skill of choosing the best options in chess. The first step is
to see the choices available. If they are doing this, just go over more positions with them
and they'll start to find the best solutions.
Problem:
My child always chooses "move away" as the option in the mini-game: What would you
do?
Solution:
Make sure they completely understand the other three choices.
Consult them with each position and see if they can show you how to take an attacker,
block an attack, and support a piece. Discuss the options with them, consulting their
opinions and understanding of the choice.