1a. Here's check again: It is important to make sure that your child understands what
"check" means and can spot check on a chessboard.
If you feel that a quick review would help, simply show them a few positions that are
check and then ask them to show you a few.
1 b. Moving out of check: Now review the step in Chapter 11, "Check;' which goes over
how to move the king out of check.
Let your child know that moving the king away is one way to handle check. There are
two others.
Step 2: You can take the attacker to get out of check
Beginners often forget that they might be able to take the attacker when they are in
check. A child's first instinct is often to move the king. For this reason, it is a good idea to
spend some time on this section and show many examples.
First start with positions where the king can
simply take the piece which has it in check.
Set up the following position:
Diagram 24. 1

Discuss this position with your child. Many beginners will assume that this is checkmate,
because the king cannot move away.
Help your child to see that the king can just take the queen, because it isn't protected
by any other piece.
Now set up this position:
Children often just move away when their
king is attacked. It is a natural response.
The queen is very powerful when next to
the king. It can seem impossible that the
king could just take it.
It's important to show many examples.
Then, when it comes up in a game, your
child will ask, "Is that queen actually pro­
tected? No? I can take it!"
-Laura and Bill
Diagram 24.2
Point out that the white queen is checking
the black king, but that nothing is protect­
ing the queen. The black king can just take
it.
Set up more examples showing how the
king can get out of check by taking the at­
tacker.
Also show positions where another piece
can take the attacker. Here are a couple of
examples:
Here the rook can just take the queen.
Diagram 24.3

In this position the knight can take the
bishop.
Diagram 24.4
Step 3: Mini-game: Can you take the attacker?
Set up various positions where your child can take the attacker.
Here are a few examples:
Diagram 24.5 Diagram 24.6
In this position, Black's rook is checking Here Black's king is in check by White's
White's king. Ask, "Can White take the at­ powerful queen. Ask your child if the
tacker?" black king can take the queen.

Diagram 24.7 Diagram 24.8
The black bishop is checking the white The black knight has put the white king in
king. What can White do about it? check. Can White take the attacker?
Here the white rook is attacking the black
king. Can Black take the attacker?
Diagram 24.9

Step 4: Here's how you can block to get out of check
Explain to your child that you can block an attack on the king to get the king out of
check.
Set up this example:
Ask your child to show you how the black
king is in check. Go over with your child
that the king can't move out of check.
Diagram 24. 10
Show them that the only way to get the
king out of check in diagram 24.10 is to
block the attack with the rook, by putting it
between the king and the attacker:
Diagram 24. 11

Set up more positions like this. Here's an example:
Here the black queen is checking the white
king. Can White block to get out of check?
Diagram 24. 12
Step 5: Mini-game: You block to get out of check
Now set up more positions and have your child find the correct blocking move to get
out of check.
Here are two examples:
Diagram 24.13 Diagram 24. 14

Step 6: Mini-game: Show me the three ways a king can get out of check
Have your child set up positions that show you the three ways a king can get out of
check.
Make sure they show you all three ways:
Moving the king out of check
•
Taking the attacker
•
Blocking the check
•
Step 7: Mini-game: How should you get the king out of check?
Now quiz your child on different positions, showing different ways to get out of check.
Here are some sample positions:
Diagram 24. 15 Diagram 24. 76
Here the white king must move to get Here Black must block to get out of check.
out of check.

Here White must take the queen to get out
of check.
Diagram 24. 7 7
Once they have this down, show examples where the king has choices. Here are three
positions:
Diagram 24. 7 8 Diagram 24. 7 9
Here Black can either move the king or Here the king can take the rook, or move
block with the bishop. away.

Here White can block with the rook or the
king can move.
Diagram 24.20
You can also come up with positions where
all options are available. Here's an example:
Here Black can block the check with the
rook, take the rook with the bishop, or
move away.
Diagram 24.21
??
. . , ,,
• • •
Problem:
My child tends to only move the king to get out of check when there are better options.

Solution:
Set up a lot of examples where they can block or take. Discuss with them the advantag­
es of both. Sometimes moving the king out of check is the best solution. You just want
them to know that there are options.
Problem:
My child has trouble finding how the king is in check.
Solution:
Review Chapter 11, "Check:' It is important that they can see this easily for these mini­
games.
Problem:
My child has trouble seeing attacks on the long diagonal.
Solution:
This is a common issue for beginners. If you spot this problem, give them many exam­
ples where a piece is attacking on a long diagonal. Show them positions where pieces
are attacked by a bishop or queen, and positions where the king is in check along the
diagonal.
Problem:
My child didn't see that a pawn could take an attacker.
Solution:
Show them many examples where a pawn takes the attacker to get out of check.
Problem:
My child continually moves the king into check.
Solution:
Review Chapter 11, "Check:' Make sure that your child understands when the king is in
check and when it isn't. Spend some time on the various mini-games in that chapter.