Explain to your child that in chess there are times when neither side can win. It isn't
important to go over many examples of this. Basically, if you can't checkmate the other
player, you can't win.
In other games, this might be called a tie, but in chess we call this a "draw:'
Here is an example that is clearly a draw:
Diagram 26. 1
Show your child that, since a king cannot attack another king (without putting itself in
danger), there is no way for either side to checkmate the other.
Go over how this would be a draw. No one wins, no one loses.
A draw can also be agreed upon by two players. One player offers a draw and the other
accepts it.
Step 2: This is stalemate

Explain to your child that when one side cannot make a legal move and that side's king
is not in check, it's a draw. This special kind of draw is called "stalemate:'
This can be a confusing concept, so make sure to provide lots of examples of stalemate
(as well as examples of positions that are not).
Here is a good place to start:
Diagram 26.2
Beginners will often hit this position in a game. If it's White's turn, White cannot make a
legal move. Explain to your child that this is stalemate because there are no legal moves
yet White is not in check.
However, if it is Black's move, it isn't stale­
mate. Black can move.
Once they see that, show them this position:
Diagram 26.3

Explain that this is not stalemate because White does have a legal move (White can
move the pawn).lt is important that your child understands that stalemate isn't just that
the king cannot move, but that one side cannot make any legal move.
Here are more examples of stalemate:
Diagram 26.4 Diagram 26.5
Here it is Black's turn. Go over all the pos­ This is not checkmate because the white
sible squares where the king could go, king is not in check. This is stalemate be­
and make sure your child sees why the cause the white king is not in check yet
king can't go to any of them. White has no legal moves.
Diagram 26.5 is similar to the other positions you went over with your child in the chap­
ter called,"Checkmate:'lt's good to point out stalemates where the king is in the corner,
because there are fewer squares where it can go.
Discuss the positions with your child. Ask them who was ahead. Who has more pieces
and who would have won had it not been stalemate? In these positions, the side that
stalemated the other player should have won.
Stalemate can happen a lot when someone tries to get too many queens. Beginners
love to load up the board with queens. It can be hard not to stalemate the other player
when you have so much firepower, when the other side has little or none!

Step 3: Mini-game: Is this stalemate?
Now show your child positions and ask,"ls this stalemate?" Make sure to include a lot of
examples that aren't stalemate, such as positions where:
The king is in check and can move.
•
One side is in checkmate.
•
One side cannot move their king, but they can make another legal move.
•
The positions shouldn't involve many pieces and should just show the basic themes. The
important thing is that your child learns to spot when there is a stalemate.
When your child can spot this very quickly, without errors, you know they have this con­
cept down.
Even so, this is a mini-game to revisit again and again.
Step 4: Mini-game: Is this check, checkmate, or stalemate?
Show your child various positions, similar to the ones in the mini-game from Step 3, and
have them tell you which are check, checkmate, and stalemate.
Here are some examples:
Diagram 26.6 Diagram 26.7
This is checkmate. This is stalemate.

Diagram 26.8
This is check.
When your child does the Checkmate Checklist, they will notice that the king can move
out of check. As a side note, you could point out that when the white king moves to the
one square where it can go, Black can checkmate on the next move. See if they can spot
that mate.
Diagram 26.9 Diagram 26.10
This is checkmate. This is stalemate.

Diagram 26.11 Diagram 26. 12
This is check. White can move out of check, This is checkmate.
so it is not checkmate.
You'll want to come up with many examples like this. It is okay if the themes are repeat­
ed over and over. The common ones will come up in many of their games.
If your child wants to come up with examples of their own and quiz you, encourage this.
It would help them tremendously to compose these positions and figure out with you if
they are check, checkmate, or stalemate.
In the end, your child needs to learn how to identify check, checkmate, and stalemate
quickly, so work on increasing the speed of this mini-game.
This is another mini-game that you can review over and over with benefit.
??
. ' Ill
• • •
Problem:
My child doesn't understand what stalemate is.

Solution:
Review the first step of the Checkmate Checklist. Discuss it with them. Make sure they
understand that check is an important part of checkmate.
Next, show them an example where one side cannot move. Have them pretend that
they are playing Black here and that it is their turn:
Diagram 26. 13
Now ask your child, "Are you in check?" Make sure they see that it isn't check. If they feel
it is, do a rapid review of Chapter 1 1, "Check:' Once they see that this isn't check, con­
tinue.
Now point to each square around the black king and ask, "Can the black king move
here?" Make sure they understand that the king has no legal move. If they have trouble
spotting whether the king is in check, review "Step 3: Is this check?" from Chapter 1 1,
"Check;' to be sure they can quickly identify when the king is in check.
You might also review "Step 6: Can the king go here?" in Chapter 1 1, "Check:'
Once they understand that the king isn't in check and that it can't move, simply tell
them that this is stalemate and is a draw.
Set up this position in another corner and ask, "Is this stalemate?" Have them explain to
you why it is stalemate.

Problem:
My child confuses checkmate with stalemate.
Solution:
This is a common confusion with beginning chess players.
The key difference is that when a king is in checkmate, it must be in check. And if the
king is in check, it cannot be stalemate.
Show your child many examples of both checkmate and stalemate. It helps to create
positions that are very similar, and show why one position is checkmate and why one is
stalemate.
For instance, this is stalemate:
Diagram 26. 14
Make sure that your child sees that the king is not in check here, but cannot move (and
Black doesn't have any other pieces to move).

Now show them this position:
Diagram 26. 7 5
Tell them that this one is checkmate and the other is stalemate. Ask them to tell you the
difference between the two positions. Why is the second one checkmate?
Show them more positions like this. When you feel that they have this down, have your
child show you examples of checkmate and stalemate, explaining to you the difference
between the two.
Problem:
My child has trouble telling check and checkmate apart.
Solution:
Review Chapter 25, "More About Checkmate;' focusing on the mini-games there. Give
your child many examples of positions that are just check and positions that are check­
mate. Go over why one is checkmate and the other is not.
This takes a lot of practice, and these mini-games should be revisited again and again.
As your child gains experience, they will see new nuances in these positions and mini­
games, and will learn more from them.